Univariate analysis (#28)
KatieMurphy98/Year-4-Project: markdown/chapters/univariate-analysis/main.rmd

gr_stacked <- rbind(ver4[,c(4:7, 34:41)], ver6[,c(4:7, 34:41)])

set_a <- ver1[,c(4:9, 42:44)]
set_b <- ver2[,c(4:9, 42:44)]
set_c <- ver3[,c(4:9, 42:44)]
set_d <- ver4[,c(4:9, 42:44)]
set_e <- ver5[,c(4:9, 42:44)]
set_f <- ver6[,c(4:9, 42:44)]

### SALES_AB
ab_sep <- rbind(ver1[,c(4:7, 45:47)], ver2[,c(4:7, 45:47)], ver3[,c(4:7, 48:50)], ver4[,c(4:7, 51:53)], ver5[,c(4:7, 48:50)], ver6[,c(4:7, 51:53)])

ab_trn <- rbind(ver1[,c(4:7, 48:50)], ver2[,c(4:7, 51:53)], ver3[,c(4:7, 45:47)], ver4[,c(4:7, 45:47)], ver5[,c(4:7, 51:53)], ver6[,c(4:7, 48:50)])

ab_zero <- rbind(ver1[,c(4:7, 51:53)], ver2[,c(4:7, 48:50)], ver3[,c(4:7, 51:53)], ver4[,c(4:7, 48:50)], ver5[,c(4:7, 45:47)], ver6[,c(4:7, 45:47)])

### SALES_CD
cd_trn <- rbind(ver1[,c(4:7, 54)], ver2[,c(4:7, 54)], ver3[,c(4:7, 55)], ver4[,c(4:7, 54)], ver5[,c(4:7, 55)], ver6[,c(4:7, 55)])

cd_zro <- rbind(ver1[,c(4:7, 55)], ver2[,c(4:7, 55)], ver3[,c(4:7, 54)], ver4[,c(4:7, 55)], ver5[,c(4:7, 54)], ver6[,c(4:7, 54)])

```

This chapter will discuss a basic univariate analysis of the survey results, in which we look at the summary statistics and make by-eye comparisons between groups withing the whole population.

> In the chapter 3 we will delve deeper into the data, sub-setting for various groups and performing comparisons between and within these groups to ascertain whether different demographic and population factors have an effect on responses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In chapter 3 we will delve deeper into the data, sub-setting for various groups and performing comparisons between and within these groups to ascertain whether different demographic and population factors have an effect on responses.
```

\subsection{Ninja Warrior - Part 1}

> The first part of the survey consisted of showing the respondents three differently scaled bar plots representing how many times four obstacles were used throughout 10 seasons of the television show American Ninja Warrior. The three presented visualisations all showed the same raw data, but each was produced with a different y-axis scaling, in order to assess whether changing the scale in these ways affects viewer interpretation of interpreting both differences and exact bar heights. Each respondent was asked four questions; two free form answer and two multiple choice. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first part of the survey consisted of showing the respondents three differently scaled bar plots representing how many times four obstacles were used throughout 10 seasons of the television show American Ninja Warrior. The three presented visualisations all showed the same raw data, but each was produced with a different y-axis scaling, in order to assess whether changing the scale in these ways affects user interpretation of both differences and exact bar heights. Each respondent was asked four questions; two free form answer and two multiple choice. 
```

FYI if you line break your text your diffs and thus these comments will be more precise.

The use of free form answers did result in occasional non-valid answers, such as statements along the lines of "Don't know" when a number was required. Most people also opted to write a number between 0 and 1 for the fourth question when a percentage was required. 

> **Approximately many times would you say the 'Salmon Ladder' was used?**

Reviewer: This need something like:

```
The specific question for this is:
```

also (minor):

```suggestion
> **Approximately many times would you say the 'Salmon Ladder' was used?**
```

That will put the above in a block quote and might stand out "nicer" but have a look and decide if you like it like that.

```{r}
control <- ctrl_y_scale$con_1
control[which(control == "41/42")] <- # take midpoint of two values
control <- na.exclude(as.numeric(control))

truncated <- as.numeric(trnc_y_scale$trn_1)

logarithmic <- log_y_scale$log_1
logarithmic[which(logarithmic == "Don't know")] <- NA
logarithmic[which(logarithmic == "Next to none.")] <- NA
logarithmic[which(logarithmic == "10^15")] <- NA
logarithmic[which(logarithmic == "10^9")] <- NA
logarithmic[which(logarithmic == "1000.0")] <- NA
logarithmic[which(logarithmic == "1000")] <- NA
logarithmic <- as.numeric(na.exclude(logarithmic))

y_scale_1_all <- cbind(control, truncated, logarithmic)
```

> This question, the first of the survey, asked participants to type the how many times Salmon Ladder was used, based on the bar plot. The `correct' answer, or rather the true height of the corresponding bar, was 42. There were three invalid answers in these responses; one for the R versions of the survey and two for the Python versions. The invalid response in the R survey was '41/42', which we will take as 41.5, and the invalid Python responses were given as 'Don't know' and 'Next to none.'. These will be considered as 'NA' responses and discounted from the quantitative analysis, however they do provide useful qualitative insights into how the respondents reacted to the plots, particularly as we see both were entered for the logarithmically scaled plot made in Python. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This question, the first of the survey, asked participants to type how many times Salmon Ladder was used, based on the bar plot. The `correct' answer, or rather the true height of the corresponding bar, was 42. There were three invalid answers in these responses; one for the R versions of the survey and two for the Python versions. The invalid response in the R survey was '41/42', which we will take as 41.5, and the invalid Python responses were given as 'Don't know' and 'Next to none.'. These will be considered as 'NA' responses and discounted from the quantitative analysis, however they do provide useful qualitative insights into how the respondents reacted to the plots, particularly as we see both were entered for the logarithmically scaled plot made in Python. 
```

Now we consider the shape of the distributions of the responses for the control and truncated plots, with the response set for logarithmically-scaled plot excluded from this, since the high magnitude values will stretch out the x-axis and not allow us to properly see the distributions.

```{r, fig.cap = "Density plot showing distributions of responses regarding the control and truncated plots"}

brks <- c("Control", "Truncated", "Logarithmic")
vals <- c("#1c9e77", "#d95f02", "#7570b3")

ggplot() +
  geom_density(data = as.data.frame(control), aes(x=control, col = "Control"))+
  geom_density(data = as.data.frame(truncated), aes(x=truncated, col = "Truncated"))+
  labs(x="Response", y="Density")+
  scale_colour_manual(name = " ", breaks = brks[1:2], values = vals[1:2])+
  theme_classic()

> ```
> As expected from the above analysis the two distributions are very similar and we can see that they are, in fact, very much non-normal and asymmetrical. Similarly, the box plot of the response sets (below) displays the similarity between them, where the boxes look almost identical aside from the black square depicting the mean for the truncated plot being slightly higher than for the control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

As expected from the above analysis the two distributions are similar and we can see that they are, in fact, non-normal and asymmetrical. Similarly, the box plot of the response sets (below) displays the similarity between them, where the boxes look almost identical aside from the black square depicting the mean for the truncated plot being slightly higher than for the control.
```

```{r}
y_scale_1_all <- as.data.frame(y_scale_1_all)
resp <- c(control, truncated)
type <- c(rep('Control', 69), rep('Truncated', 70)) 
stats_1 <- data.frame(resp, type)

ggplot(data = stats_1, aes(x=type, y=resp, fill=type))+
geom_boxplot(outlier.colour="black", outlier.shape=1,
             outlier.size=2, notch=F)+
  theme_classic()+
  stat_summary(fun=mean, geom="point", shape=15, size=4)+
  scale_fill_manual(breaks = brks, values = vals)+
  scale_y_continuous(labels = seq(1, 7, 1), breaks = seq(1, 7, 1))+
  ylab("Value")+
  xlab("Plot Type")
```

Now consider the response distribution for the logarithmically-scaled plot, after removing the two responses of "10^15" and "10^9", as well as the values at 1000.

```{r, fig.cap = "Density plot showing distributions of responses regarding the logarithmic scaled plot, after removing values of greater or equal to 1000"}

ggplot() +
  geom_density(data = as.data.frame(logarithmic), aes(x=logarithmic, col = "Logarithmic"))+
  labs(x="Response", y="Density")+
  scale_colour_manual(name = " ", breaks = brks[3], values = vals[3])+
  theme_classic()

> ```
> We see that after removing the outlying values, taken as any value above 1000, the distribution is positively skewed and centres around 40 with a tail up to 150. The summary statistics for the outlier removed set shows a mean of 37.45, with a range of $[9, 150]$ and median of 35. The IQR shows that $50\%$ of these values lie in the range $[22.5, 40]$, meaning we appear to potentially have a greater underestimation than for the other two plots, also shown by the mean.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
We see that after removing the outlying values, taken as any value above 1000, the distribution is positively skewed and centres around 40 with a tail up to 150. The summary statistics for the outlier removed shows a mean of 37.45, with a range of $[9, 150]$ and median of 35. The IQR shows that $50\%$ of these values lie in the range $[22.5, 40]$, meaning we appear to potentially have a greater underestimation than for the other two plots, also shown by the mean.
```

Finally consider the three distributions together.

```{r, fig.cap = "Density plot showing distributions of responses regarding all three plots, after removing values greater or equal to 1000 from the responses fore the logarithmic plot"}

brks <- c("Control", "Truncated", "Logarithmic")
vals <- c("#1c9e77", "#d95f02", "#7570b3")

ggplot() +
  geom_density(data = as.data.frame(control), aes(x=control, col = "Control"))+
  geom_density(data = as.data.frame(truncated), aes(x=truncated, col = "Truncated"))+
  geom_density(data = as.data.frame(logarithmic), aes(x=logarithmic, col = "Logarithmic"))+
  labs(x="Response", y="Density")+
  scale_colour_manual(name = " ", breaks = brks, values = vals)+
  theme_classic()

```

> The distribution looks remarkably different to the other two, with much less height and a wider spread. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The distribution for the Logarithmic scale is different to the other two, with much less height and a wider spread. 
```

Overall, it appears that the use of the truncated scale had little impact on judging the height of an individual bar as compared to a control with no scale alterations, and if anything marginally improved the respondents' ability to judge the height. It has also been observed that the scale by default ending at 40 while the bar height is at 42 leads to some underestimation in the height for both the control and truncated bar plots.

> Now considering the logarithmic-scale plot, The Python default of standard form notation appears to have confused certain respondents, who are perhaps not as used to seeing this notation, and there was a very large range in the responses along with one person not even entering a number, but rather stating that they "Don't know", and another stating they believed the value was "Next to none". The "Next to none" entry is very subjective, but could potentially be be assumed as a value close to 0, once again maybe as a result of standard form being less well known to this respondent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now considering the logarithmic-scale plot, The Python default of standard form notation appears to have confused certain respondents, who are perhaps not as used to seeing this notation, and there was a large range in the responses along with one person not even entering a number, but rather stating that they "Don't know", and another stating they believed the value was "Next to none". The "Next to none" entry is  subjective, but could potentially be be assumed as a value close to 0, once again maybe as a result of standard form being less well known to this respondent.
```

Reviewer: > close to 0, once again maybe as a result of standard form being less well known to this respondent.

It *could* be argued that `next to none` is actually an indication of a very good understanding of standard form.

> This should be considered when designing visualisations; the creator of the visualisations may find the logarithmic scale or standard form more effective in showing the data, but they should consider the target audience. Are the audience going to be familiar with this? If, for example, visualisations are being published in a paper targeted at academics in a subject likely to use such scalings often and understand them, this may be a good way to depict the data. However, using this in something such as an advertising campaign could mislead the public, causing them to either over or under estimate values. As previously discussed, however, this is often done deliberately in order to push the message the creator wishes to sell. 

Reviewer: If/when you do the focus group this is a particular point to discuss, are you conclusions as to the causation behind correct here? (Not saying they're not but it's something to potentially ask respondents). If you do then you should point at that here.

> **Approximately how much more than 'Log Grip' would you say 'Salmon Ladder' was was used?**

Reviewer: Same suggesting re the block quote (if you like it put it throughout).

```{r}

control <- ctrl_y_scale$con_2
truncated <- trnc_y_scale$trn_2
logarithmic <- log_y_scale$log_2

y_scale_2_all <- cbind(control, truncated, logarithmic)

ggplot() +
  geom_density(data = as.data.frame(control), aes(x=control, col = "Control"))+
  geom_density(data = as.data.frame(truncated), aes(x=truncated, col = "Truncated"))+ 
  geom_density(data = as.data.frame(logarithmic), aes(x=logarithmic, col = "Logarithmic"))+
  scale_colour_manual(name = " ", breaks = brks, values = vals)+
  labs(x="Response", y="Density")+
  
  theme_classic()

```
The distribution for the logarithmic plot values has a fairly wide, flat curve, showing that the subjective view appeared to vary a fair amount from respondent to respondent. The distribution for the truncated plot seems very skewed to the right, depicting that the subjective view on the difference between the bar heights was that the difference was on the larger side. 

> An initial look at the table of summary statistics reveal means of 5.375, 3.671 and 5.871 respectively for the control, log and truncated plots, meaning that for the 'baseline' control plot, participants on average judged the difference to be moderately significant, with the perceived difference being smaller for the log plot and marginally larger for the truncated plot. This appears to be consistent with results from [[[CITE chrome-extension://cbnaodkpfinfiipjblikofhlhlcickei/src/pdfviewer/web/viewer.html?file=file:///C:/Users/Katie/Downloads/YangVargasRestrepoStanleyMarsh%20(2020).pdf]]], in which the researchers, similar to this survey, showed participants a series of control bar plots alongside those with a truncated axis, and concluded that the difference in values for the truncated axis were perceived to be larger than those of the control plots. However, the average perceived difference here is fairly small, much smaller than initially hypothesised, so tests will be needed to decipher whether this is significant.

Reviewer: The citation is to a local url. (Not a web url)

```{r}
default <- default[-which(default >= 30)]
narrower <- narrower[-which(narrower <= 25)]

ratio_1_all <- cbind(default, wider, narrower)
```
After removing the outliers the medians have stayed the same, and the mean has obviously decreased for the default and increased for the narrower, however, these means are all still fairly similar to each other and at a first glance prior to testing it again seems that changing the aspect ratio, at least to the degree tested here, is inconsequential to interpretation of the actual value. As expected as well, the variances for the outlier-removed sets have decreased.

**Comparisons**

The last set of questions in part 2 show respondents all three of the bar plots presented in this section and ask them to select which they find most aesthetically pleasing, and which they find easiest and hardest to interpret. Below a table is laid out giving the number of respondents that selected each plot for each of the three questions.

> ```{r echo=F}

Reviewer: This table does notcompilet well in the pdf.
